- 40% - Participation in Readings and Discussions. Each week we will devote a substantial portion of class to reading and discussion. You are expected to contribute to discussion and engage actively through analysis and reflection on the text as well as relating relevant outside works. This will require a substantial and regular outside time commitment and will undergird your success in the course.
- 20% - Reading Presentations. Once this semester, you will work prepare and guide discussion of one of our texts during class. Signups will happen in the second week of class. You are expected to have read and intimately studied the text as well as researched its contexts and secondary literature. You will start class with a 20-30 minute presentation in which you 1) make legible to your peers in terms of its internal logic and extrinsic sociocultural, economic, theoretical and art historical connections 2) through leading the class through close reading, explicate key sections of the text that demand slow study 3) articulate clearly the stakes of the text for our contemporary moment, as it concerns new media artists 4) pose several key questions driven by the text that will lead discussion.
- 30% - 3 mini-projects. In response to the three tutorials, you will draw on your existing art practice to engage the topics of the course in an applied work. Given the technological focus of the course, it’s likely you may engage with new (or old) media in some way, but not exclusively expected.
- 10% - Collective Zine. Throughout the semester, you will format the documentation of your mini-projects given a template. This will facilitate their ingression into a collective zine, which collects all students projects from the semester. Aspects of the zine may be generative (following a p5*js tutorial). The zines will be published at the end of the semester using SAIC's risographic duplicator. Your assessment here hinges on your design of collective design; how will the group decide how the projects are arranged, what colors are used, what will figure on the cover? how will the group deal with emergent questions?
