“For us the red glow of the sunset should be as much part of nature as are the molecules and electric waves by which men of science would explain the phenomenon.”

- Alfred North Whitehead, The Concept of Nature

Formed in 2009, a group of geologists called the Anthropocene Working Group investigated evidence suggesting that our world had entered a new geological era distinct from the almost 12,000-year long Holocene. The evidence included test samples from the earth’s geological record indicating the ubiquitous presence of both fossil fuel particles and plutonium from weapons testing. The working group concluded in 2016 with the affirmation that, indeed, the Anthropocene had began in 1950.

Meanwhile, a group of continental philosophers began assembling approaches (first at a few conferences and later on blogs) to a set of ideas loosely called “speculative realism”. These speculative realists rejected correlationism, a historically sticky assertion that as humans, our ability to think is inextricably correlated to our small sliver of human being. For correlationism, we have no access to the vast non-human universes of experience. Working against and apart from the deep roots of correlationism, speculative realists turned to heterodox philosophical practices to devise new work that attempted to decorrelate thinking from the limits of anthropocentrism.

These two independent and related events continue to make massive impacts on art, architecture, and design practices in the west. On one hand, the relatively technical term speculative realism gave birth to more popular philosophical offshoots such as new materialism(s) and object-oriented ontology. New avenues were left in SR’s wake that allowed for older conceptual projects like panpsychism, posthumanism, accelerationism, and the process philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead to be revived in a new context. With new movements such as “acid communism”, one might have felt like philosophers and artists were in the same creative business. What is clear is that by operating at the limits of human thought, these diverse ideas allow creative practitioners to situate their work as a critical and inquiring engagement with the non-human world.

It is none other than the anthropocene itself that sets these stakes. In the face of planetary catastrophe, ecocide, and a climate refugee crisis, many creative practitioners feel impelled to make work that is impactful in this domain. Philosopher and scientist Isabelle Stengers writes that the anthropocene signals “the intrusion of Gaia”, whose forcing us to think and feel anew portends the possibility of new kinds of politics sufficient to this moment. Like every aspect of our social life on earth, art, architecture, and design practices are in crisis. Instead of looking for answers or solutions, the speculative realisms and streams of thought adjacent to it provide a different set of questions. How can creative practice catalyze the intrusion of Gaia? How can we create moments for it to be felt and thought? How can arts practice reinvent how to be human in relation to a world demanding we reinvent ourselves?

This course charts a path through the various domains of political, aesthetic, and metaphysical theorization of the human and its place in the more-than-human universe. This will include considerations of ecology, human-animal relations, modern science and climate modeling, invisible phenomena such as sound and the electromagnetic spectrum, plant phenomenology, and contemporary theorizations of nature which do not privilege the human. Students will learn how to rigorously study challenging texts, prepare points for the discussion, and research their context in the sphere of art, design, architecture and contemporary thought. Students will be assessed through an in-class presentation and a final paper. In their writing, they will deploy a theoretical framework in relation to the course’s topics through which they discuss creative practice, whether their own, artists’ discussed in class, or others.

.
