The story starts long before we were born. It ends long after our deaths. It begins before the birth of the universe, before the concept of birth had learned to move matter, or had been moved to matter. In the same way a story lingers beyond its telling, our story ends in the way all stories strive to: towards a dissipation of its creative energy we were unequipped to notice. Again and again, we are always arriving in the middle.

Franz Joseph Haydn's Creation Oratorio begins with a movement titled: "Aus dem Khaos" (Out of the Chaos). To talk about the emergence of creativity, we don't need to talk about God, but sometimes, we must admit: on one hand, it helps and has helped many people who have walked this Earth. On the other it complexifies, demands us to create faith. If we don't speak of God, more specifically, God as Creator, then we find ourselves with a different problem:

Is all the world a clockwork? When we speak of fate, do we conjure a model of an entirely predetermined universe? When we speak of luck or serendipity, do we conjure a model of a universe which is entirely open to chance? There are other ways to speak of the world which allows us to speak of both at once, which seek to make meaningful distinctions between what and how events can be determined in advance. Not prediction but speculation.

When we talk about chaos, we are speaking at once about order. It's helpful to think of these as verbs or tendencies in constant play. Order needs chaos and chaos needs order, not just in the world, but in our capacity to think with the forces, or rather the nexuses of forces, that move towards order with one hand and to chaos with the other. Evolutionary biology describes a tendency towards diversification over the course of millennia; what we call life is a signpost for a continuously undulating creative difference engine, generating ever more ornate (in)formations and structurations. Thermodynamic physics tells us that the universe tends towards homogenization; the heat death of the universe is signal's surrender to noise on a cosmic timescale. In psychosocial, biological, economic, political, environmental registers, these dynamics continuously play out through the fabric of the world's unfurling.

How to hold both tendencies at once? Chaos theoreticians Ilya Prigogyne and Isabelle Stengers wrote that “we grow in direct proportion to the amount of chaos we can sustain and dissipate” (1984). When we talk about chaos (and order), we are talking about systems, about networks of influence and influencing. We are also talking about our ability to model those systems. What chaos teaches us is about the relevance, possibilities and limitations of modeling. A model seeks to diagram the flows of a system, its changes, its dynamics. A modeling of the starting conditions, an inclusion of the variables that seem to matter, a possibility for speculation about its outcomes.

Models can be useful. A map is a model of the land. Don't mistake the map for the territory, so it goes. But the aphorism goes on, often overlooked: Maps are useful to the extent that their contours index the territory. Something from the territory must always be omitted from a map. What is omitted is a speculation by the mapmaker on what may not be important to the map reader. We may dismiss a model as irrelevant or inaccurate. We may dismiss models altogether as erroneous, but models are not done with us yet: to dismiss modelling as incomplete is itself a modeling in search of completeness from an ungraspable elsewhere.

Rehearsing is a modeling. We are constantly making models; if I start a conversation about a conflict in one way, will it influence how we are able to speak about and process the conflict? We make models about our models: does overthinking the conversation overdetermine my ability to speak and process the conflict, to show up for my conversation partner as supple and sympathetic? There are important political questions modeling: modeling by whom and for whom? Models can tell the state how a population might behave; models might anticipate whether you will buy a product when you are shown an advertisement. Models are worlds; modeling is an image of thought for which it is models all the way down.

There are modes of modeling, or rather: modeling is modal. Art, science, and philosophy are modes of modeling with a common task: to transcend the stupification of what "we all know". "We all know" is a safety blanket that affords comfort and security against the terror of a world in which we don't know what will happen next. It is a technology of ordering our world, a tool that allows us to engage with a model of the world, a protection spell. Art, science, and philosophy have their own equipment for interfacing with the chaotic, for protecting the surveyors of chaos against its more deleterious effects while giving them special purchase on the unprestatable.

These abstract equipments are affective, biological, psychosocial technologies. Whether these modes admit it or not, these technologies emerge from our experiences of the trials in the world. A philosopher pens an essay; a scientist runs an experiment; an artist devises and improvises a performance. The etymology of the word essay, which means literally to try, reveals a common root between experiment and experience. These technologies afford different things. Experimental practice guided by the modern Western scientific method assembles a model of the world through inductive principles laying claim to a general order of things. The scientific method protects against what is unpredictable about individual and specific experience. Artistic practice experiments with the specificity of experience (feeling, perception, and materiality) to express a perspective which models particularity. Artistic practice protects against the violence of inductive generalization, totalization, and universalization of particular experience. Philosophy, like experimental forms of art and science, may do either, or it may seek to create a model of the world which can hold both the particular and the general.

Whatever the case, our experiences persist of both the specific and the general alike. The world oscillates between order and chaos, troubling a dogmatic allegiance either to models of specificity or generality. Through experience, art, science, and philosophy cohere into and reinvent their practices, methods, techniques, and technologies through modeling process. The fashioning of these techniques towards experience evidence different perspectives towards the uncertain nature of the future. We do the same in our everyday, though our models and practices are subject to different scales of peer scrutiny. This continual reinvention shows us that models do not have the last say about what they model; we are transformed by what models show us and fail to reveal or anticipate, and our models are transformed in turn.

Models break down at their limits. When they do, we might realize that we are always arriving in the middle: to compose a system's starting conditions is an act of abstraction. This abstraction, when done well however, is informed by the concrete flux of experience. A good mapmaker knows the territory. But it's impossible to know how the territory will change, how the person who reads the map will show up the territory and how they will depart. You can rehearse a conversation, but it's impossible to account for all the contingencies in the psychic, social, and environmental registers across which a conversation will traverse. Anyone who's gone through a breakup knows as much.

Across mental, social, and environmental registers, our experience is replete with unprestatable events, events that alter the fabric of experience, that blow our models apart entirely: a global pandemic, the death of a friend, the moment you realize you are trans, falling in love. These events are ruptures in the fabric of life, portals to experiences you couldn't have known were possible before, but after which become absolutely necessary to think of at all. The stakes of chaos and order are grounded in the flux of the universe: creativity at scales grand and molecular alike.

This seminar seeks to get a grip in this slippery terrain; to understand what it means to get a grip in a world in which certainty is fleeting at best. How does one, as Ana Ramos puts in, find the ground on which to "stand in the midst" of the world's undulating uncertainty? Most importantly: how are we rewarded by detaching from our compulsions toward an ever more complete model, and yet, what can models sensitive to incompleteness generate new ways of seeing and acting in the world?
